element.innerText [ = value ]
Returns the element's text content "as rendered".

Can be set, to replace the element's children with the given value, but with line breaks converted to br elements.

element.outerText [ = value ]
Returns the element's text content "as rendered".

Can be set, to replace the element with the given value, but with line breaks converted to br elements.

The get the text steps, given an HTMLElement element, are:

If element is not being rendered or if the user agent is a non-CSS user agent, then return element's descendant text content.

This step can produce surprising results, as when the innerText getter is invoked on an element not being rendered, its text contents are returned, but when accessed on an element that is being rendered, all of its children that are not being rendered have their text contents ignored.

Let results be a new empty list.

For each child node node of element:

Let current be the list resulting from running the rendered text collection steps with node. Each item in results will either be a string or a positive integer (a required line break count).

Intuitively, a required line break count item means that a certain number of line breaks appear at that point, but they can be collapsed with the line breaks induced by adjacent required line break count items, reminiscent to CSS margin-collapsing.

For each item item in current, append item to results.

Remove any items from results that are the empty string.

Remove any runs of consecutive required line break count items at the start or end of results.

Replace each remaining run of consecutive required line break count items with a string consisting of as many U+000A LF code points as the maximum of the values in the required line break count items.

Return the concatenation of the string items in results.

✔MDN
The innerText and outerText getter steps are to return the result of running get the text steps with this.

The rendered text collection steps, given a node node, are as follows:

Let items be the result of running the rendered text collection steps with each child node of node in tree order, and then concatenating the results to a single list.

If node's computed value of 'visibility' is not 'visible', then return items.

If node is not being rendered, then return items. For the purpose of this step, the following elements must act as described if the computed value of the 'display' property is not 'none':

select elements have an associated non-replaced inline CSS box whose child boxes include only those of optgroup and option element descendant nodes;

optgroup elements have an associated non-replaced block-level CSS box whose child boxes include only those of option element descendant nodes; and

option elements have an associated non-replaced block-level CSS box whose child boxes are as normal for non-replaced block-level CSS boxes.

items can be non-empty due to 'display:contents'.

If node is a Text node, then for each CSS text box produced by node, in content order, compute the text of the box after application of the CSS 'white-space' processing rules and 'text-transform' rules, set items to the list of the resulting strings, and return items. The CSS 'white-space' processing rules are slightly modified: collapsible spaces at the end of lines are always collapsed, but they are only removed if the line is the last line of the block, or it ends with a br element. Soft hyphens should be preserved. [CSSTEXT]

If node is a br element, then append a string containing a single U+000A LF code point to items.

If node's computed value of 'display' is 'table-cell', and node's CSS box is not the last 'table-cell' box of its enclosing 'table-row' box, then append a string containing a single U+0009 TAB code point to items.

If node's computed value of 'display' is 'table-row', and node's CSS box is not the last 'table-row' box of the nearest ancestor 'table' box, then append a string containing a single U+000A LF code point to items.

If node is a p element, then append 2 (a required line break count) at the beginning and end of items.

If node's used value of 'display' is block-level or 'table-caption', then append 1 (a required line break count) at the beginning and end of items. [CSSDISPLAY]

Floats and absolutely-positioned elements fall into this category.

Return items.

Note that descendant nodes of most replaced elements (e.g., textarea, input, and video — but not button) are not rendered by CSS, strictly speaking, and therefore have no CSS boxes for the purposes of this algorithm.

This algorithm is amenable to being generalized to work on ranges. Then we can use it as the basis for Selection's stringifier and maybe expose it directly on ranges. See Bugzilla bug 10583.

The set the inner text steps, given an HTMLElement element, and a string value are:

Let fragment be the rendered text fragment for value given element's node document.

Replace all with fragment within element.

The innerText setter steps are to run set the inner text steps with this and the given value.

The outerText setter steps are:

If this's parent is null, then throw a "NoModificationAllowedError" DOMException.

Let next be this's next sibling.

Let previous be this's previous sibling.

Let fragment be the rendered text fragment for the given value given this's node document.

If fragment has no children, then append a new Text node whose data is the empty string and node document is this's node document to fragment.

Replace this with fragment within this's parent.

If next is non-null and next's previous sibling is a Text node, then merge with the next text node given next's previous sibling.

If previous is a Text node, then merge with the next text node given previous.

The rendered text fragment for a string input given a Document document is the result of running the following steps:

Let fragment be a new DocumentFragment whose node document is document.

Let position be a position variable for input, initially pointing at the start of input.

Let text be the empty string.

While position is not past the end of input:

Collect a sequence of code points that are not U+000A LF or U+000D CR from input given position, and set text to the result.

If text is not the empty string, then append a new Text node whose data is text and node document is document to fragment.

While position is not past the end of input, and the code point at position is either U+000A LF or U+000D CR:

If the code point at position is U+000D CR and the next code point is U+000A LF, then advance position to the next code point in input.

Advance position to the next code point in input.

Append the result of creating an element given document, "br", and the HTML namespace to fragment.

Return fragment.

To merge with the next text node given a Text node node:

Let next be node's next sibling.

If next is not a Text node, then return.

Replace data with node, node's data's length, 0, and next's data.

Remove next.

